A variety of hints, strategies and spoilers.

This is not meant to be comprehensive, just things you may not
discover on your own by playing the game.


Rolling Characters
------------------

When rolling characters, your primary attribute will be 16 or 18 points,
all others will be 12 or less.

The best armor you can roll is Plate, but it rusts.
The best armor you can roll that won't rust is Padded.  Either is
good early in the game, but if you start with anything less
than Plate, you should upgrade to Plate, Mithril or Crystalline armor at
some point.

Keep rolling characters until you find one you like, then save it so you
can use it again in other games.

You can roll any type of armor in easy games.


Food
----

The amount of food you need is affected by the weight of your pack and by
the rings you wear.  It's easy to starve early in the game when food is
scarce, so be sparing in wearing rings of regeneration, alertness, sustain
ability and searching, unless you have a ring of slow digestion too. 

Blessed food lasts twice as long as regular food.

Some food is special: lembas have healing properties and miruvors heal and
restore abilities.

Note that the blessed/cursed status of food (and some rings) is
not shown in inventories until the end of the game.


Secret Doors and Traps
----------------------

Use the 's' command to search for traps and secret doors, or use the
searching run commands (<ctrl-H, ctrl-J, ...).  There are no secret doors
or traps on the first level, but they become more common later.

You can set traps with the '^' command.  I like to turn on the
'cutcorners' option, then set a trap just inside a door.  That way, you can
step around the trap, but many monsters can't.

If you get stuck (e.g. surrounded by monsters you can't defeat), you can
set a trap door, and then use the '>' command to fall through it to the
next level.


Mazes
-----

Mazes can be challenging, as it may take a long time to find the staircase
out.  Light and magic mapping spells help, but there are also quicker ways
out: blessed teleportation, phasing through the floor, phasing through the
ceiling (when flying or levitating) or creating a trap door and then
falling through it.


Party Rooms
-----------

Once you descend deeper in the dungeon, you'll find the occasional room filled
with monsters and treasure.  The best way to deal with these is to stay in
the corridor so the monsters can only approach you one at a time.  If
that's not enough, set a trap blocking the door of the adjacent room (see
above), then retreat behind the trap periodically to recover from your
injuries.


Armor
-----

Crystalline armor provides the best protection overall, but a strong 
blow can shatter it, unless you protect it first.  It also protects you
from lightning, and can't rust.

Mithril is the second best overall.  It gives extra protection
from magical attacks, and can't rust.

Note that protected crystalline armor can still shatter in hard games.
To prevent this, first enchant a protection scroll, then use
it to doubly protect your armor.  If you fully enchant and doubly protect
your armor it becomes shiny and protects you from gazing monsters.


Weapons
-------

The best weapons are the claymore, two-handed sword, long-pike and bastard
sword.  Some monsters can only be hit by enchanted weapons, others require
multiply enchanted weapons, and a few can't be hurt by any weapon.

Enchanting metal weapons prevents rusting.  Enchanting a weapon
beyond the safe point and anointing it with a magic hitting scroll
creates a vorpal blade.


Potions
-------

Gain Ability - Increments one of your abilities (inteligence, strength,
wisdom, etc.).  A blessed potion of gain ability increases all your
abilities (up to a maximum of 25 points).  Collect all the cursed and
normal gain ability potions you find, then enchant them when you can.  Be
warned, though, gain ability can hurt you if any of your attributes are
down (e.g. "Str:8(12)").  In that case, quaff a restore abilities potion or
eat a miruvor first, to get back to normal.

Clear Thought - clears up confusion resulting from fighting certain
monsters, teleporting or falling through a trap door.  A blessed clear
thought prevents you from being confused again for the rest of the game.

Phasing - lets you walk through walls (and monsters).  You can also phase
down through the floor or up through the ceiling (if you're wearing
a ring of levitation), but doing so disables phasing.

You can't phase down through the floor while wearing a ring of levitation,
but if you try it then the phasing will never wear off.


Scrolls
-------

Enchantment - This is the most useful general purpose scroll in the game,
as you can use it to bless most things.  You can safely enchant rings to
+5, armor to +8 and weapons to +15 combined hit and damage points.  Each
time you enchant items beyond that there's a chance they'll explode.
These limits increase by two for blessed enchantments, but in hard games
the increased limit only applies to doubly protected items.

Protection - Protecting items in your pack stops monsters from stealing or
cursing them, up until level 95 anyway.  Protecting metal armor prevents
rusting.

Acquirement - This rare scroll lets you add any item to your pack.
Normally it chooses a type at random (armor, weapon, scroll, ...)
then you select an item you'd like from that category, but a blessed
scroll of acquirement lets you choose any item of any type.

Genocide - This lets you eliminate any type of monster from the game.
Blessed genocide lets you remove two types.

Ownership - Owned items return to you when thrown.  Blessed ownership
stops them from being stolen.


Rings
-----

Add Intelligence and Increase Wisdom - non-magical characters who increase
their intelligence to 16 (or wisdom to 17) gain the ability to cast spells
(or pray).

Wizardry - enhances your ability to cast spells and prayers.
When blessed, it lets you reach new spells and prayers a bit earlier.

Sustain Health - prevents you from getting sick, diseased or infested with
a parasite.

Levitation - prevents damage from traps, except fire traps.  Also prevents
you from going down, so it's most useful once you've finished exploring the
dungeon and are on your way up again.  Blessed levitation protects you from
fire traps as well.

Blessed search, regeneration, levitation and wizardry rings work better than
normal; cursed search, regeneration and wizardry are worse.


Spells and Prayers
------------------

You can cast blessed spells and prayers by typing upper-case letters.

This costs three times the usual number of points, and only works when
there are three spells/prayers listed beyond the one you want.


Options
-------

Cutcorners - lets you move through doors at an angle, unless your dexterity
is reduced.  Also affects the more dextrous monsters.

Showcursor - show the text cursor.  This is normally hidden, which may make
it hard to find your character on crowded levels.

Autopickup - pick up anything you step on, unless 'm'oving or using
the <ctrl> movement commands.  Set "noautopickup" to change this.

Autosave - save the game at the start of each normal level, unless your
character is seriously injured, sick, blind or fainting.  Then, should
you die, you can roll back to the previous save point instead of starting
over from the beginning.

Difficulty - set to easy, normal, hard or very hard.  You can also
change difficulty on the fly, which may help if you get in over your head.

Usemouse - lets you use a mouse to move, fight monsters, pick things up, etc.

Other options are unchanged from previous versions of urogue.

Most options can be changed with the 'o' command.  Or you can
use the SROGUEOPTS environment variable to set them in advance.  E.g.:

  (linux)   export SROGUEOPTS=cutcorners,difficulty=hard,autosave

  (windows) SET SROGUEOPTS=cutcorners,difficulty=easy,autosave

The minimum dungeon size is 24x80.

On linux, resize the window before running urogue and the game will adjust
the dungeon to fit.

On Windows, urogue creates a new 24x80 window by default.  To change the
size, set the PDC_LINES and PDC_ROWS batch variables.  E.g.

    SET PDC_LINES=30
    SET PDC_COLS=90
    urogue.exe

A few options can only be set on the command line.
This includes the monster selection options described in README.md,
as well as:

  urogue -s : print list of top scores and exit

  urogue -v : print version string and exit

  urogue -n : start a new game, ignoring any previously saved game

  urogue -d : turns on debugging

